# Tool Part

## Lexical

The following terms are used all over this section :

__[PROJECT DIR]__ : Refers to the root folder of the project to build (the one where you would put pom.xml or build.xml file if you were using ANT or Maven).

__[JERKAR HOME]__ : Refers to the folder where is intalled Jerkar. You should find _jerkar.bat_ and _jerkar_ shell scripts directly under this folder.

__[JERKAR USER HOME]__ : Refers to the folder where Jerkar stores caches, binary repository and global user configuration.

<strong>Build Classes :</strong> Java source code or compiled classes extending `org.jerkar.tool.JkBuild`. 
Their _build methods_ can be invoked and their pubic fields set from the command line.
In its Java source form, they are located under _[PROJECT DIR]/build/def_ directory. 

<strong>Build Classpath :</strong> Classpath on which depends _build classes_ to get compiled and executed. It consists
in _Jerkar_ core classes but can be augmented with any third party lib or build classes located in another project. 
Once _build class_ sources have been compiled, _build classpath_ is augmented with their _.class_ counterpart.
  
<strong>Build Methods :</strong> Java methods member of _build classes_ and invokable from Jerkar command line. 
They must be public zero-args instance methods returning void. 
 
<strong>Options :</strong> This is a set of key-value used to inject parameters. Options can be mentioned 
as command line arguments, stored in specific files or hard coded in _build classes_.


## In a Glance

The Jerkar tool consists in an engine able to run Java source code or Java compiled code from the command line.
 
Generally this code is intended to build Java projects but it can be used for any purpose.

In practice, you have a project structure respecting the following layout :

```
[Project Dir]
   |
   + build
      + def
         + MyBuild.java   <----- class extending JkBuild  
         + MyUtility.java   <---- Utility class consumed by MyBuild
   + src
      + main
          + java
          + resources
   + ...
```

A build class may look like :

```Java
import org.apache.commons.httpclient.HttpClient;
import org.apache.commons.httpclient.methods.GetMethod;
import org.jerkar.tool.JkDoc;
import org.jerkar.tool.JkImport;
import org.jerkar.tool.JkBuildd;
import com.google.common.base.MoreObjects;

@JkImport("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")  // Imports 3rd party library to be used by build code
@JkImport("com.google.guava:guava:21.0")
public class MyBuild extends JkBuild {    // Callable build class (extending JkBuild)
    
    public String myParam1 = "myDefault";    // Can be overriden by injecting options in command line

    @JkDoc("Performs some tasks using http client")    // Only for self documentation purpose
    public void myMethod1() {                   // Build method (callable from command line)
        HttpClient client = new HttpClient();
        GetMethod getMethod = new GetMethod("http://my.url/" + myParam1);
        ....
    }
    
    public void myMethod2() {   // An other build method 
        MyUtility.soSomething();
        ...
    }

}
```

From __[Project Dir]__,  you can invoke any build method defined on `MyBuild` class from the command line.

For example, executing `jerkar myMethod1 myMethod2 -myParam1=foo` does the following : 
1. compile sources located in _build/def_ directory,
2. instantiate a `MyBuild` instance,
3. inject _"foo"_ in the `myParam1` field,
4. invoke `myMethod1()`,
5. invoke `myMethod2()`.

If your project does not supply any _build class_, Jerkar picks `org.jerkar.tool.JkBuild`. In despite this class
does not provide any particular methods, you can still perform full Java builds by invoking built-in 'java' plugin 
like this `jerkar clean java#pack` ([See Plugins](#Plugins)).

Executing `jerkar` or `jerkar help` on command line displays all callable methods and options for the current _build class_.

The following chapters detail about how the mechanism works, what you can do and the limitations.

