## Files

File manipulation is a central part of building software. 
Jerkar embraces JDK7 *java.nio.file* API by adding some concept around and provides a powerful fluent style API to perform 
recurrent tasks with minimal effort. 

The following classes lie in `org.jerkar.api.file` package : 

* `JkPathFile` : A simple wrapper around  for file (not folder) with copy, content interpolation, 
   checksum, deletion, creation features.
   
The following snippet creates a file on file system and copy the content of the specified url into it
```java
JkPathFile.of("config/my-config.xml").createIfNotExist().replaceContentBy("http://myserver/conf/central.xml");
```
   
* `JkPathSequence` : A list of `java.nio.file.Path`.

Instances of this class are returned by dependency manager to turn a set of dependency into a resolved classpath.

* `JkPathMatcher` : A `java.nio.file.PathMatcher` based on `java.nio.file` glob pattern or regerxp.

Used in path trees to filter in/out files according name patterns.

* `JkPathTree` : A root folder (or a zip file) along a `PathMatcher` providing operations as copy, navigate, zip, iterate.
   This central class is spread all over Jerkar APIs.
   
The following snippet copy all non java source files to another directory preserving structure.
```java
JkPathTree.of("src").andMatching(false, "**/*.java").copyTo("build/classes");
``` 
   
* `JkPathTreeSet` : A set of `JkPathTree`. 

Instances of this class are used by Java project api to defines source and resource files.

 * `JkResourceProcessor` : Provides a means to copy a set of files, preserving the structure and 
 replacing some text by other text. Typically used for replacing token as `${server.ip}` by concrete value. 

```java
Map<String, String> varReplacement = new HashMap<>();
varReplacement.put("${server.ip}", "123.211.11.0");
varReplacement.put("${server.port}", "8881");
JkResourceProcessor.of(JkPathTreeSet.of(Paths.get("src"))).andInterpolate("**/*.properties", varReplacement)
    .generateTo(Paths.get("build/classes"), Charset.forName("UTF-8"));
```




