## Jerkar Runtime

This chapter describes how to use Jerkar with command line and mostly what happens behind the cover when Jerkar is run. 

Jerkar is a pure Java application requiring __JDK 8__. __JDK__ is required and __JRE__ is not sufficient as Jerkar uses the __JDK tools__ to compile build classes.

Jerkar can be launched from both command line and your IDE.

### Jerkar from Command line
 
To ease launching Java processes from command line, Jerkar provides shell scripts ( [jerkar.bat](https://github.com/jerkar/jerkar/blob/master/org.jerkar.core/src/main/java/META-INF/bin/jerkar.bat) for __Windows__ 
and [jerkar](https://github.com/jerkar/jerkar/blob/master/org.jerkar.core/src/main/java/META-INF/bin/jerkar) for __Unix__ ). They are located at root 
of _[JERKAR HOME]_. _[JERKAR HOME]_ is supposed to be in your PATH environment variable. 

This script does the following :

1. Find the _java_ executable path : If a `JAVA_HOME` environment variable is defined then it takes the one lying in this JDK, otherwise it takes the one accessible in the _PATH_ of your OS.
2. Get java execution option : If an environment variable `JERKAR_OPTS` exists then its value is passed to the `java` command line parameters.
3. Get the classpath in the following order :
	* all jar and zip files found under _[WORKING DIR]/build/boot_
	* the _[JERKAR_HOME]/org.jerkar.core.jar_ file 
4. Run the _java_ process for launching `org.jerkar.tool.Main` class passing the command line argument as is. This class main method does the following :                                                                     
     1. Parse the command line.
     2. Populate system properties from configuration files and command line.
     3. Pre-process build classes . In this step, build class code is parsed to detect 3rd party and external project imports. Imports are added to the _build classpath_.
     4. Compile build classes using the classpath computed in previous step.
     5. Select the build class to run.
     6. Instantiate selected build class, including injecting options and loading plugins.
     7. Invoke methods specified in command line arguments : methods are executed in the order they appear on the command line.

The following sub-sections detail about these steps.

#### Parse the Command Line

Jerkar parses the command line and processes each arguments according the following pattern :

* __Argument starts with `@` :__ This is a library import clause : the content following it will be added to the _build classpath_. 
  For example `jarkar myMethod @org.jerkar:an-extra-plugin:3.3` augments the _build classpath_ with the _an-extra-Plugin_ jar.
  This is similar to add `@JkImport("org.jerkar:an-extra-plugin:3.3")` on the _build class_.
  This is useful to load plugins that modifies/enrich behavior of build classes without needing to mention it in the code.

* __Argument starts with `-` :__ This is an option declaration. The content following is is expected to be formatted as _optionName=optionValue_. 
  For example, `-repo.build.url=http://my.repo.milestone/' will inject 'http://my.repo.milestone/' in the 'repo.build.url' Jerkar option.

* __In other cases :__ argument is considered as a method name to invoke on the build class instance.

#### Populate System Properties from Configuration Files and Command line

Jerkar loads system properties in order from :
* _[JERKAR HOME]_/system.properties 
* _[JERKAR USER HOME]_/system.properties
*  command line parsed above
    
The last loaded properties override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

Jerkar follows a similar process to load options. It loads in order : 
* _[JERKAR HOME]_/options.properties 
* _[JERKAR USER HOME]_/options.properties
*  command line parsed above

The last loaded options override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

#### Pre-process Build Class Code (Import 3rd party library into Build Classpath)

In order to compile _build classes_, Jerkar has to compute _build classpath_ first. With Jerkar you can specify build dependencies 
directly inside the source code using `@JkImport` or `@JkImportBuild` annotations as shown below.

Note that these dependencies are only to be used in _build classes_ and are not included in the dependencies of the project to build.

```Java 
@JkImport("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")
@JkImport("com.google.guava:guava:18.0")
@JkImport("../local/library/bin")
public class HttpClientTaskBuild extends JkBuild {

    @JkImportBuild("../another/project/using/jerkar")
    private OtherBuild otherBuild;  // Build class from another project
    
    ...
```

To achieve this, Jerkar parses source code of <strong>all</strong> classes under _build/def_ and add the detected imports to the build classpath.
Note that classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.

When a dependency is expressed as a maven/ivy module, Jerkar tries to resolve it using repository url defined by in order : 
* If option `repo.buildName` is present and option `repo.${repo.buildName}.url` is present as well, it takes the value of this property. 
* If no url is defined as such, it takes the value of `repo.build.url` option.
* If this option is not set, then it takes the value of `repo.download.url` option. 
* If the latest is not present as well, it falls back to Maven Central.

If a repository needs credentials, you need to supply it through Jerkar options `repo.[repo name].username` and `repo.[repo name].password`.

Note that you can define several urls for a `repo.[repo name].url` by separating then with coma (as `repo.build.url=http://my.repo1, http://my.repo2.snapshot`).
 
As with other repo, if the download repository is an Ivy repo, you must prefix url with `ivy:` so for example you'll get `repo.build.url=ivy:file://my.ivy/repo`.

#### Compile Build Classes

Jerkar compiles build class files prior to execute it. Build class files are expected to be in _[PROJECT DIR]/build/def_. 
Classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.
If this directory does not exist or does not contains java sources, the compilation is skipped.
Compilation occurs upon the following classpath :
* Java libraries located in _[PROJECT DIR]/build/boot_.
* org.jerkar.core.jar library
* Classpath defined in build classes as explained above.

It outputs class files in _[PROJECT DIR]/build/output/build-classes_ directory.

Jerkar uses the compiler provided by the running JDK. 

#### Select Build Class

Once compiled, Jerkar augments the _build classpath_ with classes compiled in previous step.
Then it selects one _build class_ from _build classpath_ and instantiate it.

The selection logic is :
* If `-BuildClass` option (shorthand `-BC`) is specified, then Jerkar selects a class having the same name or same 
short name among _build classes_ present in _build classpath_.
* If this option is not set, Jerkar selects the first build class extending `JkBuild` in alphabetic order then sub-package in deep first present 
  in _[PROJECT DIR]/build/output/build-classes_ directory. 
  This means that class `MyBuid` will be selected prior `apackage.ABuild`, and `aa.bb.MyClass` will be selected prior `ab.OtherClass`.
* If no such class found, Jerkar selects the built-in `******org.jerkar.tool.JkRun` class.

#### Instantiate Build Class

The build instantiation process is defined in `ork.jerkar.tool.JkBuild#of` factory method. It consists in :
1. Creating a new build class instance (Invoking default constructor).
2. Injecting defined options in public instance fields.
3. Invoking `JkBuild#afterOptionsInjected` method on build class. This method might be overridden by users to configure build and plugins before they have been activated.
4. Loading plugins defined in command line and injecting options into them.
5. Invoking `JkPlugin#activate` method on each loaded plugins. This method is defined by plugin authors.
6. Invoking `JkBuild#afterPluginsActivated` on build class. This method might be overridden by users to configure build class instance once plugins have been activated.

#### Invoke Command Line Methods

Once build class instantiated, Jerkar invokes instance methods mentioned in command line as `jerkar myFistMethod mySecondMethod ...`. 
Methods are invoked in order they appear in command line regardless if method is defined on the build class itself or in a plugin.

In order a method to be considered as a build method (invokable from Jerkar command line), it must :
* Be public
* Be instance method (no static method)
* Accept no arguments
* Return void

If Jerkar command line specifies no method, then `help` method is invoked.

### Jerkar from IDE

#### IDE Classpath Setting

In order your IDE compiles and launches your build classes, you must ensure that project/module classpath contains :
* `org.jerkar.core.jar` (found in Jerkar distrib)
* libs and folders mentioned in `@JkImport` annotations of your build classes
* project/modules mentioned in `@JkImportBuild` annotations of your build classes
* of course, libs and folder dependencies for the project to build

Plugin methods `eclipse#generateFiles` and `intellij#generateIml` can achieve this for you.

#### Launch from IDE

If launched from the IDE, _build classes_ are already compiled and the classpath already set by the IDE. 
This leads in a simpler and faster process.

To launch Jerkar from your IDE, you can go two ways :
 
One is to create a main method within your build class as below and invoke it.

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    JkInit.instanceOf(MyBuild.class, args).doDefault();
} 
```
The `JkInit#instanceOf` method loads options from args and instanciate BuildClass instance. Then user can 
configure it using hard coding prior launching any method programmatically.

The other way is to launch `org.jerkar.tool.Main` method from your IDE with same arguments as you would do with command line.

### Embedded Mode

When launched from command line, ___[JERKAR_HOME]/org.jerkar.core.jar___ comes after ___[WORKING_DIR]/build/boot/*___ in Jerkar classpath.
This means that if a version of Jerkar (org.jerkar.core.jar) is in this directory, the build will be processed with 
this instance of Jerkar instead of the one located in in _[JERKAR HOME]_.

This is called the __Embedded__ mode. The Jerkar tool is embded within your project so the build does not depends 
of the presence and version of Jerkar installed in the host machine.

__Enable embedded mode : __

To enable embedded mode :
   1. Copy ___[JERKAR_HOME]/org.jerkar.core.jar___ into ___[PROJECT_DIR]/build/boot/*___ directory.
   2. Copy ___[JERKAR_HOME]/jerkar.bat___ and ___[JERKAR_HOME]/jerkar___ at the root of ***[PROJECT_DIR]*** (optional).

Jerkar is provided with a _scaffold_ plugin that do it for you : just execute `jerkar scaffold#run -scaffold#embed`.

<strong>Run in embedded mode : </strong>

You can go two ways :
  - execute `jerkar myFunction ...` as you would do in regular mode. This works only if you have copied jerkar/jerkar.bat shell scripts into ***[PROJECT DIR]***
  - or execute `java -cp build/boot/* org.jerkar.tool.Main myFunction ...` from ***[PROJECT_DIR]*** .


### Default path settings

#### Specify Jerkar User Home

Jerkar uses user directory to store user-specific configuration and cache files, in this document we refer to this directory using [Jerkar User Home].
By default the this directory is located at _[User Home]/.jerkar_ (_[User Home]_ being the path given by `System.getProperty("user.home");`.
You can override this setting by defining the `JERKAR_USER_HOME` environment variable.
You can get this location programmatically in your build classes using `JkLocator.jerkarUserHome()` method. 

#### Specify the local Repository Cache

Jerkar uses [Apache Ivy](http://ant.apache.org/ivy/) under the hood to handle module dependencies. Ivy downloads and stores locally artifacts consumed by projects.
By default the location is _[JERKAR USER HOME]/cache/repo_ but you can redefine it by defining the `JERKAR_REPO` environment variable.
You can get this location programmatically in your build classes using `JkLocator.jerkarRepositoryCache()` method.

#### See Effective Paths

The Jerkar displays the effective path at the very start of the process if launched with `-LogHeaders=true` option :

For example, `jerkar help -LogHeaders` will output :

```
 _______           _                 
(_______)         | |                
     _ _____  ____| |  _ _____  ____ 
 _  | | ___ |/ ___) |_/ |____ |/ ___)
| |_| | ____| |   |  _ (/ ___ | |    
 \___/|_____)_|   |_| \_)_____|_|
                                     The 100% Java build tool.

Working Directory : C:\Users\angibaudj\IdeaProjects\playground\jerkar-sample
Java Home : C:\Program Files (x86)\Java\jdk1.8.0_121\jre
Java Version : 1.8.0_121, Oracle Corporation
Jerkar Version : Xxxxx
Jerkar Home : C:\Users\angibaudj\IdeaProjects\jerkar\org.jerkar.core\build\output\distrib
Jerkar User Home : C:\Users\angibaudj\.jerkar
Jerkar Repository Cache : C:\Users\angibaudj\.jerkar\cache\repo
Jerkar Classpath : C:\Users\angibaudj\IdeaProjects\jerkar\org.jerkar.core\build\output\distrib\org.jerkar.core.jar

...
```
 
  
