## Intro

### Lexical

The following terms are used all over this section :

__[PROJECT DIR]__ : Refers to the root folder of the project to build (or to run tasks on). This is where you would put pom.xml or build.xml files.

__[JERKAR HOME]__ : Refers to the folder where is intalled Jerkar. You should find _jerkar.bat_ and _jerkar_ shell scripts eet the root of this folder.

__[JERKAR USER HOME]__ : Refers to the folder where Jerkar stores caches, binary repository and global user configuration. By default it is located at [USER DIR]/.jerkar.

__Def classes :__ Java source files located under _[PROJECT DIR]/jerkar/def_ compiled on the flight by Jerkar.

__Run Classes :__ Classes extending `org.jerkar.tool.JkRun`. Their _run methods_ can be invoked and 
their pubic fields set from the command line. Generally _def classes_ contains one _run class_ though there can be many or 
none.

__Run Classpath :__ Classpath on which depends _def classes_ to get compiled and _run classes_ to be executed. 
By default, it consists in _Jerkar_ core classes. it can be augmented with any third party lib or run classpath coming 
from another project. 
Once _def classes_ sources have been compiled, _run classpath_ is augmented with their _.class_ counterpart.
  
__Run Methods :__ Java methods member of _run classes_ and invokable from Jerkar command line. 
They must be public zero-args instance methods returning void. 
 
__Options :__ This is a set of key-value used to inject parameters. Options can be mentioned 
as command line arguments, stored in specific files or hard coded in _run classes_.


### In a Glance

The Jerkar tool consists in an engine able to run Java source code or Java compiled code from the command line.
 
Generally this code is intended to build Java projects but it can be used for any purpose.

In practice, your project has a structure respecting the following layout :

```
[Project Dir]
   |
   + jerkar
      + boot             <-------- Put extra jars here to augment run classpath.
      + def
         + MyRun.java   <----- Class extending JkRun 
         + MyUtility.java   <---- Utility class consumed by MyRun
      + output              <---- Build artifacts are generated here
   + src
      + main
          + java
          + resources
   + ...
```

A _run class_ may look like :

```Java
import org.apache.commons.httpclient.HttpClient;
import org.apache.commons.httpclient.methods.GetMethod;
import org.jerkar.tool.JkDoc;
import org.jerkar.tool.JkImport;
import org.jerkar.tool.JkRun;
import com.google.common.base.MoreObjects;

@JkImport("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")  // Imports 3rd party library to be used by def classes
@JkImport("com.google.guava:guava:21.0")
public class MyRun extends JkRun {    // The run class
    
    public String myParam1 = "myDefault";    // Overridable by injecting options in command line

    @JkDoc("Performs some tasks using http client")    // Only for self documentation purpose
    public void myMethod1() {                   // Run method (callable from command line)
        HttpClient client = new HttpClient();
        GetMethod getMethod = new GetMethod("http://my.url/" + myParam1);
        ....
    }
    
    public void myMethod2() {   // An other run method 
        MyUtility.soSomething();
        ...
    }

}
```

From __[Project Dir]__,  you can invoke any build method defined on `MyRun` class from the command line.

For example, executing `jerkar myMethod1 myMethod2 -myParam1=foo` does the following : 
1. compile sources located in _jerkar/def_ directory,
2. instantiate a `MyRun` instance,
3. inject _"foo"_ in the `myParam1` field,
4. invoke `myMethod1()`,
5. invoke `myMethod2()`.

If no _run class_ are present in _def classes_, Jerkar picks `org.jerkar.tool.JkRun`. In despite this class
does not provide any particular methods, you can still perform full Java builds by invoking built-in 'java' plugin 
executing `jerkar clean java#pack` ([See Plugins](#Plugins)).

Executing `jerkar` or `jerkar help` on command line displays all run methods and options for the current _run class_.

The following chapters detail about how the mechanism works and what you can do with.

