## Jerkar Runtime

This chapter describes how to use Jerkar with command line and mostly what happens behind the cover when Jerkar is run. 

Jerkar is a pure Java application requiring JDK 8. JDK is required and JRE is not sufficient as Jerkar uses the JDK tools to compile _def classes_.

Jerkar can be launched from both command line and your IDE.

### Jerkar from Command line
 
To ease launching Java processes from command line, Jerkar provides shell scripts ( [jerkar.bat](https://github.com/jerkar/jerkar/blob/master/org.jerkar.core/src/main/java/META-INF/bin/jerkar.bat) for Windows 
and [jerkar](https://github.com/jerkar/jerkar/blob/master/org.jerkar.core/src/main/java/META-INF/bin/jerkar) for Unix ). They are located at root 
of _[JERKAR HOME]_. _[JERKAR HOME]_ is supposed to be in your PATH environment variable. 

This script does the following :

1. Find the _java_ executable path : If a `JAVA_HOME` environment variable is defined then it takes the one lying in this JDK, otherwise it takes the one accessible in the _PATH_ of your OS.
2. Get java execution option : If an environment variable `JERKAR_OPTS` exists then its value is passed to the `java` command line parameters.
3. Get the classpath in the following order :
	* all jar and zip files found under _[WORKING DIR]/jerkar/boot_
	* the _[JERKAR_HOME]/org.jerkar.core.jar_ file 
4. Run the _java_ process for launching `org.jerkar.tool.Main` class passing the command line argument as is. This class main method does the following :                                                                     
     1. Parse the command line.
     2. Populate system properties from configuration files and command line.
     3. Pre-process _def classes_ . In this step, _def class_ code is parsed to detect 3rd party and external project imports. Imports are added to the _run classpath_.
     4. Compile _def classes_ using the classpath computed in previous step.
     5. Select the _run class_ to be run.
     6. Instantiate selected _run class_, inject options and bind plugins on it.
     7. Invoke methods specified in command line arguments : methods are executed in the order they appear on the command line.

The following sub-sections detail about these steps.

#### Parse the Command Line

Jerkar parses the command line and processes each arguments according the following pattern :

* __Argument starts with `@` :__ This is a library import clause : the text just next to, is added to the _run classpath_. 
  For example `jerkar myMethod @org.jerkar:an-extra-plugin:3.3` augments the _run classpath_ with the _an-extra-Plugin_ jar.
  This is similar to annotate a _def class_ with `@JkImport("org.jerkar:an-extra-plugin:3.3")`.
  This is intended to modifiate behavior of _run class_ by plugins dynamically.

* __Argument starts with `-` :__ This is an option declaration. The content following is is expected to be formatted as _optionName=optionValue_. 
  For example, `-repo.run.url=http://my.repo.milestone/' will inject 'http://my.repo.milestone/' in the 'repo.run.url' Jerkar option.

* __In other cases :__ argument is considered as a run method name to be invoked on the _run class_ instance.

#### Populate System Properties from Configuration Files and Command line

Jerkar loads system properties in order from :
* _[JERKAR HOME]_/system.properties 
* _[JERKAR USER HOME]_/system.properties
*  command line parsed above
    
The last loaded properties override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

Jerkar follows a similar process to load options. It loads in order : 
* _[JERKAR HOME]_/options.properties 
* _[JERKAR USER HOME]_/options.properties
*  command line parsed above

The last loaded options override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

#### Pre-process _Def Class_ Code (Import 3rd party library into _Run Classpath_)

In order to compile _def classes_, Jerkar has to compute _run classpath_ first. With Jerkar you can specify run dependencies 
directly inside the source code using `@JkImport` or `@JkImportProject` annotations as shown below.

```Java 
@JkImport("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")
@JkImport("com.google.guava:guava:18.0")
@JkImport("../local/library/bin")
public class HttpClientTaskRun extends JkRun {

    @JkImportProject("../another/project/using/jerkar")
    private OtherRun otherRun;  // Run class from another project
    
    ...
```

To achieve this, Jerkar parses source code of *all* classes under _jerkar/def_ and add the detected imports to the _run classpath_.
Note that classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.

When a dependency is expressed as a maven/ivy module, Jerkar tries to resolve it using repository url defined by in order : 
* If option `repo.runName` is present and option `repo.${repo.runName}.url` is present as well, it takes the value of this property. 
* If no url is defined as such, it takes the value of `repo.run.url` option.
* If this option is not set, then it takes the value of `repo.download.url` option. 
* If the latest is not present as well, it falls back to Maven Central.

If a repository needs credentials, you need to supply it through Jerkar options `repo.[repo name].username` and `repo.[repo name].password`.

Note that you can define several urls for a `repo.[repo name].url` by separating then with coma (as `repo.run.url=http://my.repo1, http://my.repo2.snapshot`).
 
As with other repo, if the download repository is an Ivy repo, you must prefix url with `ivy:` so for example you'll get `repo.run.url=ivy:file://my.ivy/repo`.

#### Compile Def Classes (def classes)

Jerkar compiles def class files prior to execute it. Def class files are expected to be in _[PROJECT DIR]/jerkar/def_. 
Classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.
If this directory does not exist or does not contains java sources, the compilation is skipped.
Compilation occurs upon the following classpath :
* Java libraries located in _[PROJECT DIR]/jerkar/boot_.
* org.jerkar.core.jar library
* Classpath defined in run classes as explained above.

It outputs class files in _[PROJECT DIR]/jerkar/output/def-classes_ directory.

Jerkar uses the compiler provided by the running JDK. 

#### Select Run Class

Once compiled, Jerkar augments the _run classpath_ with classes compiled in previous step.
Then it selects one _run class_ from _run classpath_ and instantiate it.

The selection logic is :
* If `-RunClass` option (shorthand `-RC`) is specified, then Jerkar selects a class having the same name or same 
short name among _run classes_ present in _run classpath_.
* If this option is not set, Jerkar looks for a _run class_ into _[PROJECT DIR]/jerkar/output/def-classes_ . 
  It looks in alphabetic order first then sub-package (deep first).
  This means that class `MyRun` will be selected prior `apackage.ARun`, and `aa.bb.MyClass` will be selected prior `ab.OtherClass`.
* If no such class found, Jerkar selects the built-in `org.jerkar.tool.JkRun` class.

#### Instantiate Run Class

The run instantiation process is defined in `ork.jerkar.tool.JkRun#of` factory method. It consists in :
1. Creating a new _run class_ instance (Invoking default constructor).
2. Injecting defined options in public instance fields.
3. Invoking `JkRun#setup` method on _run class_. This method might be overridden by users to configure run and plugins before they have been activated.
4. Loading plugins defined in command line into the _run class_ instance.
5. Invoking `JkPlugin#activate` method on each loaded plugins. This method is defined by plugin authors.
6. Invoking `JkRun#postPluginSetup` on _run class_. This method might be overridden by users to configure _run class_ instance once plugins have been activated.

#### Invoke Command Line Methods

Once _run class_ instantiated, Jerkar invokes instance methods mentioned in command line as `jerkar myFistMethod mySecondMethod ...`. 
Methods are invoked in order they appear in command line regardless if method is defined on the _run class_ itself or in a plugin.

In order a method to be considered as a _run method_ (invokable from Jerkar command line), it must :
* Be public
* Be instance method (no static method)
* Accept no arguments
* Return void

If Jerkar command line specifies no method, then `help` method is invoked.

#### Error Handling

If an exception is thrown during the execution, Jerkar displays full stack trace on the console except if 
this is a `org.jerkar.api.system.JkException`. In this case, only the message is displayed.

### Jerkar from IDE

#### IDE Classpath Setting

In order your IDE compiles and launches your _def classes_, you must ensure that project/module classpath contains :
* `org.jerkar.core.jar` (found in Jerkar distrib)
* libs and folders mentioned in `@JkImport` annotations of your _def classes_.
* project/modules mentioned in `@JkImportProject` annotations of your _def run classes_.

Plugin methods `eclipse#generateFiles` and `intellij#generateIml` achieve this for you.

#### Launch from IDE

If launched from the IDE, _def classes_ are already compiled and the classpath already set by the IDE. 
This leads in a simpler and faster process.

To launch Jerkar from your IDE, you can go two ways :
 
One is to create a main method in one of your _def classes_ as below and invoke it.

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    JkInit.instanceOf(MyRun.class, args).doDefault();
} 
```
The `JkInit#instanceOf` method loads options from args and instantiates _run classes_. Then user can 
configure it using hard coding prior launching any method programmatically.

The other way is to launch `org.jerkar.tool.Main` method from your IDE with same arguments as you would do with command line.

### Embedded Mode

When launched from command line, ___[JERKAR_HOME]/org.jerkar.core.jar___ comes after ___[WORKING_DIR]/jerkar/boot/*___ in Jerkar classpath.
This means that if a version of Jerkar (org.jerkar.core.jar) is in this directory, the run will be processed with 
this instance of Jerkar instead of the one located in in _[JERKAR HOME]_.

This is called the __Embedded__ mode. The Jerkar tool is embded within your project so the run does not depends 
of the presence and version of Jerkar installed in the host machine.

__Enable embedded mode : __

To enable embedded mode :
   1. Copy _[JERKAR_HOME]/org.jerkar.core.jar_ into _[PROJECT_DIR]/jerkar/boot/*_ directory.
   2. Copy _[JERKAR_HOME]/jerkar.bat_ and _[JERKAR_HOME]/jerkar_ at the root of [PROJECT_DIR] (optional).

Jerkar is provided with a _scaffold_ plugin that do it for you : just execute `jerkar scaffold#run -scaffold#embed`.

<strong>Run in embedded mode : </strong>

You can go two ways :
  - execute `jerkar myFunction ...` as you would do in regular mode. This works only if you have copied jerkar/jerkar.bat shell scripts into _[PROJECT DIR]_
  - or execute `java -cp jerkar/boot/* org.jerkar.tool.Main myFunction ...` from _[PROJECT_DIR]_ .


### Default path settings

#### Specify Jerkar User Home

Jerkar uses user directory to store user-specific configuration and cache files, in this document we refer to this directory using [Jerkar User Home].
By default the this directory is located at _[User Home]/.jerkar_ (_[User Home]_ being the path given by `System.getProperty("user.home");`.
You can override this setting by defining the `JERKAR_USER_HOME` environment variable.
You can get this location programmatically using `JkLocator.jerkarUserHome()` method. 

#### Specify the local Repository Cache

Jerkar uses [Apache Ivy](http://ant.apache.org/ivy/) under the hood to handle module dependencies. Ivy downloads and stores locally artifacts consumed by projects.
By default the location is _[JERKAR USER HOME]/cache/repo_ but you can redefine it by defining the `JERKAR_REPO` environment variable.
You can get this location programmatically using `JkLocator.jerkarRepositoryCache()` method.

#### See Effective Paths

The Jerkar displays the effective path at the very start of the process if launched with `-LogHeaders=true` option :

For example, `jerkar help -LogHeaders` will output :

```
 _______           _                 
(_______)         | |                
     _ _____  ____| |  _ _____  ____ 
 _  | | ___ |/ ___) |_/ |____ |/ ___)
| |_| | ____| |   |  _ (/ ___ | |    
 \___/|_____)_|   |_| \_)_____|_|
                                     The 100% Java build tool.

Working Directory : C:\Users\me\IdeaProjects\playground\jerkar-sample
Java Home : C:\Program Files (x86)\Java\jdk1.8.0_121\jre
Java Version : 1.8.0_121, Oracle Corporation
Jerkar Version : Xxxxx
Jerkar Home : C:\Users\me\IdeaProjects\jerkar\org.jerkar.core\jerkar\output\distrib
Jerkar User Home : C:\Users\angibaudj\.jerkar
Jerkar Repository Cache : C:\Users\me\.jerkar\cache\repo

...
```
 
  
