## Dependency Management

### What is a dependency ?

In Jerkar context, a __dependency__ is something that can be resolved to a set of files by a `JkDependencyResolver`.
Generally a __dependency__ is resolved to 1 file (or forlder) but it can be 0 or many.

A dependency is always an instance of `JkDependency`.

Jerkar distinguishes 3 types of __dependency__ :

* __Arbitrary files__ located on the file system (represented by `JkFileSystemDependency` class). These files are assumed to be present on the file system when the build is running.
* __Files produced by a computation__ (represented by `JkComputedDependency` class). These files may be present on file system or not. If they are not present, the computation is run in order to produce the missing files. Generally the computation stands for the build of an external project.
* __Reference to module__ (represented by `JkModuleDependency`) hosted in a binary repository (Ivy or Maven for instance) : Jerkar can consume and resolve transitively any artifact located in a repository as you would do with Maven or Ivy.

For the last, Jerkar is using <b>Ivy 2.4.0</b> under the hood. The library is embedded in the Jerkar jar and is executed in a dedicated classloader. So all happens as if there where no dependency on Ivy.

### What is a scope ?

Projects may need dependencies to accomplish certain tasks and needed dependencies may vary according the executed tasks.
For example, to __compile__ you may need _guava_ library only but to __test__ you'll need _junit_ library as well. 
To label dependencies according their usage, Jerkar uses the notion of __scope__ (represented by `JkScope` class). This notion is similar to the Maven scope.

A scope can __inherit__ from one or several scopes. This means that if a scope _Foo_ inherits from scope _Bar_ then a dependencies declared with scope _Bar_ will be also considered as declared with scope _Foo_.
For instance, in `JkJavaBuild`, scope `TEST` inherits from `RUNTIME` that inherits from `COMPILE` so every dependencies declared with scope `COMPILE` are considered to be declared with scope `RUNTIME` and `TEST` as well.   

By default, scopes are __transitive__. This has only a meaning for __reference to module__. 
If we have 3 modules having the following dependency scheme : `A` -> `B` -> `C` and the `A`-> `B` dependency is declared with a __non transitive scope__, then `A` won't depend from `C`. 
  
`JkJavaDepScope` class pre-defines scopes used in Java projects. 

**Scope Mapping** :

Projects consuming artifacts coming from Ivy repository can also use `JkScopeMapping` which is more powerful. 
This notion maps strictly to the [Ivy configuration](http://ant.apache.org/ivy/history/2.2.0/ivyfile/configurations.html) concept.



### What is a scoped dependency ?

A __scoped dependency__ (represented by `JkScopedDependency` class) is simply a __dependency__ associated with zero, one or many __scopes__.
  
  
### Define a set of dependencies

To define a set of dependencies (typically the dependencies of the project to build), you basically define a set of __scoped dependencies__.

The set of scoped dependencies concept is represented by `JkDependencySet` class. This class provides fluent API for easier instantiation. 

```Java
import static org.jerkar.api.depmanagement.JkJavaDepScopes.*;
...
return JkDependencySet.of()
    .and("com.google.guava") 
    .and("org.slf4j:slf4j-simple")
    .and("com.orientechnologies:orientdb-client:2.0.8")
    .and("junit:junit:4.11").scope(TEST)
    .and("org.mockito:mockito-all:1.9.5").scope(TEST, ANOTHER_SCOPE)
    .andFile("../libs.myjar")
    .withVersionProvider(myVersionProvider)
    .withDefaultScope(COMPILE_AND_RUNTIME);
```

Note that :

* Module version and scopes can be omitted when declaring dependencies. Versions can be provided by a `JkVersionProvider` 
and scopes can be defaulted.

* Instances of `JkDependencySet` can be combined together in order to construct large dependencySet from smaller ones.

* `JkDependencySet#ofTextDescription` provides a mean to instantiate a dependency set from a simple text as :
```
- COMPILE RUNTIME
org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-thymeleaf
org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-data-jpa

- RUNTIME
com.h2database:h2
org.liquibase:liquibase-core
com.oracle:ojdbc6:12.1.0

- TEST
org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-test
org.seleniumhq.selenium:selenium-chrome-driver:3.4.0
org.fluentlenium:fluentlenium-assertj:3.2.0
org.fluentlenium:fluentlenium-junit:3.2.0

- PROVIDED
org.projectlombok:lombok:1.16.16
```


### Defining different type of dependencies

This section describes how to declare different types of dependencies.

* `JkModuleDependency` : Dependency on Maven modules
* `JkFileDependency` (Abstract): Dependency on files to be found on file system
    * `JkComputedDependency` : Dependency on files produced by the execution of a `Runnable`.
    * `JkFileSystemDependency` : Dependency on files supposed to already exist on file system.
     

##### Dependencies on Module

This is for declaring a dependency on module hosted in _Maven_ or _Ivy_ repository. Basically you instantiate a `JkModuleDepency` from it's group, name and version.

```Java
    JkDependencySet.of()
        .and(JkPopularModule.GUAVA, "18.0")
        .and("com.orientechnologies:orientdb-client:[2.0.8, 2.1.0[")
        .and("mygroup:mymodule:myclassifier:0.2-SNAPSHOT");
```
There is many way to indicate a module dependency, see Javadoc for browsing possibilities. 

Note that :
* A version ending by `-SNAPSHOT` has a special meaning : Jerkar will consider it _"changing"_. This means that it won't cache it locally and will download the latest version from repository.  
* As Jerkar relies on Ivy under the hood, it accepts dynamic versions as mentioned [here](http://ant.apache.org/ivy/history/latest-milestone/ivyfile/dependency.html).

##### Dependencies on local files

You just have to mention the path of one or several files. If one of the files does not exist at resolution time (when the dependency is actually retrieved), build fails.

```Java
    JkDependencySet of()
        .andFile("libs/my.jar")
        .andFile("libs/my.testingtool.jar", TEST);
    }
		
``` 

##### Dependencies on files produced by computation

It is typically used for __multi projects builds__ projects.

The principle is that if the specified files are not found, then the computation is run in order to generate the missing files.
If some files still missing after the computation has run, the build fails.

This mechanism is quite simple yet powerful as it addresses following use cases :

* Dependencies on files produced by an artifact producer (`JkArtifactProducer`). A Jerkar Java project is an artifact producer.
* Dependencies on files produced by external project built with any type of technology (Ant, Grunt, Maven, Gradle, SBT, Android SDK, Make, ...).
* Dependencies on files produced by any means.   

The generic way is to construct this kind of dependency using a `java.lang.Runnable`.

```Java
Path mavenProject = Paths.get("../a-maven-project");
JkProcess mavenBuild = JkProcess.of("mvn", "clean", "install").withWorkingDir(mavenProject);
Path mavenProjectJar = mavenProject.resolve("target/maven-project.jar");
JkJavaProject externalProject = JkJavaProject.ofSimple(Paths.get("../a-jerkar-project"));
Runnable computation = () -> {}; 
return JkDependencySet.of()
    .and(JkComputedDependency.of(mavenBuild, mavenProjectJar))
    .and(externalProject);
```
Here, if _mavenProjectJar_ is absent from the file system, _Maven_ is run in order to produce it.
Similarly, if main-artifact jar produced by _externalProject_ is absent, _externalProject_ will produce it.  


### Fetch Dependencies

The `JkDependencyResolver` is responsible to resolve dependencies and provides mechanism to fetch dependencies and to 
reason about dependency trees.

A dependency resolver is instantiated with some parameters to allows to fetch files on binary repository.



























