The execution engine let to execute an arbitrary Java/Kotlin method from the command line or from an IDE. Methods are declared in regular Java/Kotlin classes. 

Build classes can be defined either as source or _.class_ files in the project to build.

## Project Structure

Every Jeka execution takes place in the context of a project. A Jeka project is a folder 
strucure containing a _'jeka'_ directory at its root. Execution must be launched from 
project root directory.

All of the following files or directories are optional except the _jeka_ directory.

```
project
+- jekaw
+- jekaw.bat
+- jeka
|  +- cmd.properties
|  +- project.properties
|  +- boot
|  |  +- somelibs.jar
|  +- def
|  |  +- SomeBuild.java
|  |  +- SomeUtils.java
|  |  +- ...
|  +- wrapper
|  |  +- dev.jeka.core-wrapper.jar
|  |  +- wrapper.properties
|  +- output
|  |  +- ...        
|  +- .work
|  |  +- ...
+- ... (project specific files)
```

## Jeka Directory Content 

By convention, every project automated or built by Jeka contains a _jeka_ directory at its root (_[Project Root]/jeka_). 
This directory contains everything _Jeka_ needs to automate or build the project.

In this directory, you may find :

  * __def__ (directory - optional) : User _Java_ and/or _Kotlin_ sources that will be executed by the execution engine.
  * __output__ (directory - generated) : Files produced by the tasks (jar files, classes, test reports, doc, ...)
  * __boot__ (directory - optional) : 3rd-party jar files users may add to be used by code located in *def*.
  * __wrapper__ (directory - optional) : Wrapper jar file for bootstrapping a specified version of Jeka.
  * __.work__ (directory - generated): Temp files generated by Jeka execution engine as compiled classes from _def_.
  * __project.properties__ (file - optional) : Contains properties defined at project level. If the project has a parent 
    directory which holds a _jeka/project.properties_ file, then those values are inherited by the child project.
  * __cmd.properties__ (file - optional) : Contains predefined command shortcuts that can be invoked with a single keyword.

Project root may also contain _jekaw_ and _jekaw.bat_ shell scripts to invoke _Jeka_ wrapper conveniently.

For the following, when we refer to the command `jeka`, you can use `./jekaw` indifferently.
All command lines are supposed to be launched from the root of the project (and not from _[Project Root]/jeka_).

!!! note
    When generating a project by scaffold mechanism, these files are created along self explanation inside their body.

## Jeka Wrapper

Jeka wrapper consists in shell scripts, a thin booting jar and a configuration file in order _Jeka_ can be executed on a specified 
version without being installed on the host machine. This is the recommended way of using _Jeka_ as it makes  builds portable from one machine to another.

* __jekaw__ and __jekaw.bat__ are respectively _Unix like_ and _Windows_ scripts to launch bootstrapping jar.
* __jeka/wrapper/dev.jeka.core-wrapper.jar__ is the bootable jar in charge of downloading and installing the specified Jeka 
  version on the host machine prior to launch _Jeka_
* __jeka/wrapper/wrapper.properties__ specifies the _Jeka_ version to use.

## Jeka User Directory

_Jeka_ automatically creates a directory  _[User Home]/.jeka_ when running for the first time. This directory may contain :

* __options.properties__ (file - optional) : Properties defined at global level (see later section).
* __cache__ (directory - generated) : Various files cached by Jeka as downloaded files and specifically dependency artifacts. This directory can be safely deleted.
* __maven_publish_dir__ (directory - generated) : Contains artifacts that your projects have published locally respecting Maven repository standards
* __ivy_publish_dir__ (directory - generated) : Contains artifacts that your projects have published locally respecting Ivy repository standards

In the contrary of Maven, _Jeka_ does not publish locally on the same repository where are downloaded dependency artifacts.

