# Introduction

**What is Jeka ?**

Jeka is both a build library and an automation tool. 

The build library helps for dealing with file sets, compilation, dependency management, testing, publishing,
launching external processes, crypto signatures... in a glance, all regular things you need to build/publish projects and especially Java projects. 
The library can be used in any Java program and does not have any dependency.

The tool is intended to execute Java source code from the console in a parameterizable way. Its architecture eases the 
reuse of build elements (logic, settings, doc, ...) across projects. 

Combined it provides a full feature build tool with endless possibilities of extension.

Although library and tool are bundled in the same jar, the library does not depend on the tool at all. It can be understood 
on its own without any knowledge of the tool.

**What this document stands for ?**

This document stands for reference guide to provide :
 * An overview of the build library AP. 
 * Details about Jeka tool behaviour.
 
If you are looking for how exactly Jeka behaves or you want to get a pretty exhaustive list of Jeka features, you are in the right place.

If you are looking for further details about API, please consult Javadoc or source code. Jeka source code has been 
written with intelligibility in mind in order to navigate easily from the user code to the Jeka engine room. 
For Java developers, reading source code and putting break points troubleshoots faster than documentation/support most of the time.  

Jeka philosophy is to be transparent and easy to master. We hope that no user will ever feel the need to buy some 
trainings or books to master it.

