# Library

Jeka contains a library for all regular things you need to build/publish projects and especially Java projects. 
It can be embedded in your own tool and used in a simple <code>main</code> method. 

The Jeka core jar embeds third party jars as _Ivy_ or _BouncyCastle_ but these libraries are embedded in the Jeka 
jar and loaded in a specific class loader. These 3rd party APIs are not visible/accessible to client code so one can 
use another version of these APIs without conflict : from user point of view, Jeka is a *zero-dependency library*.

This is an example for building and publishing a multi-module project :

```java
    JkLog.registerHierarchicalConsoleHandler();  // activate console logging

    // A project with ala Maven layout (src/main/java, src/test/java, ...)
    JkJavaProject coreProject = JkJavaProject.ofMavenLayout("../org.myorg.mycore");
    coreProject.addDependencies(
            JkDependencySet.of().and("junit:junit:4.11", JkJavaDepScopes.TEST));

    // Another project depending on the first project + Guava
    JkJavaProject dependerProject = JkJavaProject.ofMavenLayout(".");
    dependerProject.addDependencies(JkDependencySet.of()
            .and("com.google.guava:guava:22.0")
            .and(coreProject));

    dependerProject.getMaker().clean().makeAllArtifacts();  // generate source and binary jars
    dependerProject.getMaker().getTasksForPublishing().publish(); // Publish artifacts on the default binary repository 
```

Above code defines two projects, one depending on the other : building the depender project implies building the core project if not already done.

<span class="menuItem0">API Style</span>

_Jeka_ tries to stick with a consistent API design style.

**Class and Interface Naming Convention**

All Jeka public classes/interfaces starts with `Jk`. The reason is easing distinction in IDE between classes supposed be used 
in production or test and the ones used for building.

**Mutable Vs Immutable**

As a rule of thumb _Jeka_ favors immutable objects. Nevertheless when object structure is getting deep, immutability 
makes object cumbersome to configure, that's why objects of the API with deep structure are mutable while simpler are 
immutable.

**Instantiation**

All objects are instantiated using static factory methods. Every factory method names start with `of`.

**Read Accessors**

All accessor method names (methods returning a result without requiring IO, only computation) starts with `get`.

**Withers/Anders for Immutable Objects**

To create a subtly different object from an other immutable one, _Jeka_ provides :
* Methods starting with `with` when a property is to be replaced by another.
* Methods starting with `and` when a collection property is to be replaced by the same one plus an extra element.
* Methods starting with `minus` when a collection property is to be replaced by the same one minus a specified element.

**Setters/Adders for Mutable Objects**
 
To modify a mutable object, _Jeka_ provides :
* Methods starting with `set` to replace a single property value by an other.
* Methods starting with `add` to add a value to a collection property.
Those methods returns the object itself for chaining.

**Translators**

To translate an object to another representation (for example a `JkDependencySet` to a  list of `JkScopedDependency`) 
_Jeka_ provides methods starting with `to`.


<span class="menuItem0">Domains Covered by the API</span>

The previous example demonstrates how the Java/project API can be used to build and publish Java projects. This API 
relies on other lower level ones provided by _Jeka_. In a glance these are the domains covered by the _Jeka_ APIs : 

* __Files :__ File trees, filters, zip, path sequence
* __System :__ Launching external process, Logging, Meta-info
* __Cryptography :__ PGP signer
* __Dependency management :__ Dependency management, publishing on repositories
* __Java :__ Compilation, javadoc, resource processor, manifest, packager, classloader, classpath, launching 
  * __Junit :__ Launching, report
  * __Project :__ Project structure to build
* __Tooling :__ Eclipse integration, intellij integration, Maven interaction, Git
* __Support :__ Set of utility class with static methods to handle low-level concerns 







