## Files

File manipulation is a central part of building software. 
Jeka embraces JDK7 *java.nio.file* API by adding some concept around to provide a powerful fluent style API to performing 
recurrent tasks with minimal effort. 

The following classes lie in `dev.jeka.core.api.file` package : 

* `JkPathFile` : A simple wrapper around  for file (not folder) with copy, content interpolation, 
   checksum, deletion, creation features.
   
The following snippet creates a file on file system and copies into it the content of the specified url.
```java
JkPathFile.of("config/my-config.xml").createIfNotExist().replaceContentBy("http://myserver/conf/central.xml");
```
   
* `JkPathSequence` : A list of `java.nio.file.Path`.

Instances of this class are returned by dependency manager to turn a set of dependency into a resolved classpath.

* `JkPathMatcher` : A `java.nio.file.PathMatcher` based on `java.nio.file` glob pattern or regerxp.

Used by `JkPathTree` to filter in/out files according name patterns.

* `JkPathTree` : A root folder (or a zip file) along a `PathMatcher` providing operations to copy, navigate, zip or iterate.
   This central class is spread all over Jeka APIs.
   
The following snippet copies all non java source files to another directory preserving structure.
```java
JkPathTree.of("src").andMatching(false, "**/*.java").copyTo("build/classes");
``` 
   
* `JkPathTreeSet` : A set of `JkPathTree`. 

Instances of this class are used by Java project api to defines source and resource files. It also helps to create fat jars.

 * `JkResourceProcessor` : Provides a means to copy a set of files, preserving the structure and 
 replacing some text by other text. Typically used for replacing token as `${server.ip}` by concrete value. 

```java
Map<String, String> varReplacement = new HashMap<>();
varReplacement.put("${server.ip}", "123.211.11.0");
varReplacement.put("${server.port}", "8881");
JkResourceProcessor.of(JkPathTreeSet.of(Paths.get("src"))).andInterpolate("**/*.properties", varReplacement)
    .generateTo(Paths.get("build/classes"), Charset.forName("UTF-8"));
```




