## Jeka Runtime

This chapter describes how to use Jeka with command line and mostly what happens behind the cover when Jeka is run. 

Jeka is a pure Java application requiring JDK version 8 or higher (tested until 12). JDK is required and JRE is not sufficient as Jeka uses the JDK tools to compile _def classes_.

Jeka classes can be launched both from command line and from your IDE as regular Java main method.

### Jeka from Command line
 
To ease launching Java processes from command line, Jeka provides shell script `jeka.bat` and `jeka`. 
They are located at root of _JEKA HOME_ which is supposed to be in your PATH environment variable. 

This script does the following :

- Find the _java_ executable by looking at, in order :
  - `JEKA_JDK` environment variable 
  - `JAVA_HOME` environment variable
  - The java executable accessible from `PATH` environment variable.
  
  The `java` executable must be one from a JDK and not a JRE, as Jeka needs `javac` to compile _DEF CLASSES_.
  
- Get java execution option : If an environment variable `JEKA_OPTS` exists then its value is passed to the `java` command line parameters.
- Get the classpath in the following order :
	- all jar and zip files found under _WORKING_DIR/jeka/boot_
	- the _JEKA_HOME/dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar_ file 
- Run _java_ class `dev.jeka.core.tool.Main` passing the command line argument as is.

### Jeka Main Class

Jeka entry point is `dev.jeka.core.tool.Main#main` method.
                                                                    
     1. Parse the command line.
     2. Populate system properties from configuration files and command line.
     3. Construct DEF CLASSPATH by parsing DEF CLASSES source code.
     4. Compile DEF CLASSES using DEF CLASSPATH.
     5. Select the Jeka class to be run.
     6. Instantiate selected Jeka class, inject options and bind plugins on it.
     7. Invoke methods specified in command line arguments : methods are executed in the order they appear on the command line.

The following sub-sections detail about these steps.

#### Parse the Command Line

Jeka parses the command line and processes each arguments according the following pattern :

* __Argument starts with `@` :__ This is a library import clause : the text just next to, is added to the _def Classpath_. 
  For example `jeka myMethod @dev.jeka:an-extra-plugin:3.3` augments the _def Classpath_ with the _an-extra-Plugin_ jar.
  This is similar to annotate a _def class_ with `@JkDefClasspath("dev.jeka:an-extra-plugin:3.3")`.
  This is intended to modifiate behavior of _Jeka class_ by plugins dynamically.

* __Argument starts with `-` :__ This is an option declaration. The content following is is expected to be formatted as _optionName=optionValue_. 
  For example, `-repo.def.url=http://my.repo.milestone/' will inject 'http://my.repo.milestone/' in the 'repo.def.url' Jeka option.

* __In other cases :__ argument is considered as a Jeka (method) to be invoked on the _Jeka class_ instance.

#### Populate System Properties from Configuration Files and Command line

Jeka loads system properties in order from :
* _[JEKA HOME]_/system.properties 
* _[JEKA USER HOME]_/system.properties
*  command line parsed above
    
The last loaded properties override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

Jeka follows a similar process to load options. It loads in order : 
* _[JEKA HOME]_/options.properties 
* _[JEKA USER HOME]_/options.properties
*  command line parsed above

The last loaded options override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

#### Construct DEF CLASSPATH

In order to compile _DEF CLASSES_, Jeka has to compute _DEF CLASSPATH_ first. With Jeka you can specify dependencies 
directly inside the source code using `@JkDefClasspath` or `@JkDefImport` annotations as shown below.

```Java 
@JkDefClasspath("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")
@JkDefClasspath("com.google.guava:guava:18.0")
@JkDefClasspath("../local/library/bin")
public class HttpClientTaskRun extends JkCommandSet {

    @JkDefImport("../another/project/using/jeka")
    private OtherCommandSet otherCommandSet;  // CommandSet class from another project
    
    ...
```

To achieve this, Jeka parses source code of *all* classes under _jeka/def_ and add the detected imports to the _def Classpath_.
Note that classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.

##### Repositories

When a dependency is expressed as a maven/ivy module, Jeka tries to resolve it against a binary repository.

Jeka defines this url by looking at following options, in order : 
* `repo.defName` and `repo.${repo.defName}.url` (example : repo.defName=build_repo, repo.build_repo.url=https://my.buid.repo/url )
* `repo.def.url`
* `repo.download.url`
*  Maven Central.

If a repository needs credentials, you need to supply it through Jeka options `repo.[repo name].username` and `repo.[repo name].password`.

Note that you can define several urls for a `repo.[repo name].url` by separating then with coma (as `repo.def.url=http://my.repo1, http://my.repo2.snapshot`).
 
As with other repo, if the download repository is an Ivy repo, you must prefix url with `ivy:` so for example you'll get `repo.def.url=ivy:file://my.ivy/repo`.

#### Compile Def Classes

Jeka compiles def class source files prior to execute it. Def class source files are expected to be in _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/def_. 
Classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.
If this directory does not exist or does not contains java sources, the compilation is skipped.
Compilation occurs upon the following classpath :
* Java libraries located in _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/boot_.
* dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar library
* Classpath defined in Jeka classes as explained above.

It outputs class files in _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/.work/def-classes_ directory.

Jeka uses the compiler provided by the running JDK. 

#### Select CommandSet Class

Once compiled, Jeka augments the _def Classpath_ with classes compiled in previous step.
Then it selects one _Jeka class_ from _def classpath_ and instantiate it.

The selection logic is :
* If `-CommandClass` option (shorthand `-CC`) is specified, then Jeka selects a class having the same name or same 
short name among _Jeka classes_ present in _def classpath_.
* If this option is not set, Jeka looks for a _Jeka class_ into _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/output/def-classes_ . 
  It looks in alphabetic order first then sub-package (deep first).
  This means that class `SomeCommands` will be selected prior `apackage.SomeCommands`, and `aa.bb.SomeCommands` will be selected prior `ab.OtherCommands`.
* If no such class found, Jeka selects the built-in `JkCommandSet` class.

#### Instantiate CommandSet Class

The Jeka class instantiation process is defined in `ork.jeka.tool.JkCommandSet#of` factory method. It consists in :
1. Creating a new _Jeka class_ instance (Invoking default constructor).
2. Injecting defined options in public instance fields of the Jeka class and in the imported ones.
3. Injecting fields options in the public instance fields of the bound plugins
4. Initialising bound plugins (invoking `JkPlugin#beforeSetup` method)
5. Invoking `JkCommandSet#setup` method on _COMMAND CLASS_. This method is supposed to be override to set specific settings.
6. Invoking `JkPlugin#afterSetup` method on each bound plugins. 
7. Invoking `JkCommandSet#postSetup` on _Jeka class_. This method might be override.
8. The Jeka class instance is ready.

#### Invoke Methods Specified in Jeka Command Line arguments 

Once Jeka class instance is ready, Jeka invokes instance methods mentioned in command line as `jeka myFistMethod mySecondMethod ...`. 
Jeka invokes methods, in same order they appear in command line regardless if method is defined on the _Jeka class_ itself or in a plugin.

In order a method to be considered as a _Jeka method_ (invokable from Jeka command line), it must :
* Be public
* Be instance method (no static method)
* Accept no arguments
* Return void

If Jeka command line specifies no method, then Jeka invokes `help`.

#### Error Handling

If an exception is thrown during the execution, Jeka displays full stack trace on the console except if 
this is a `JkException`. In this case, Jeka displays only the message.

### Jeka from IDE

#### IDE Classpath Setting

In order your IDE compiles and launches your _def classes_, you must ensure that project/module classpath contains :
* `dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar` (found in Jeka distrib)
* libs and folders mentioned in `@JkDefClasspath` annotations of your _def classes_.
* project/modules mentioned in `@JkDefImport` annotations of your _def Jeka classes_.

Plugin methods `eclipse#files` and `intellij#iml` achieve this for you.

#### Launch from IDE

If launched from the IDE, _def classes_ are already compiled and the classpath already set by the IDE. 
This leads in a simpler and faster process.

To launch Jeka from your IDE, you can go two ways :
 
One is to create a main method in one of your _def classes_ as below and invoke it.

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    JkInit.instanceOf(MyCommands.class, args).doSomething();
} 
```
The `JkInit#instanceOf` method loads options from args and instantiates _Jeka classes_. Then user can 
configure it using hard coding prior launching any method programmatically.

The other way is to launch `Main` method from your IDE with same arguments as you would do with command line.

### Wrapper mode

Jeka offers a wrapper mechanism (similar to Maven and Gradle) to let execution independent of the Jeka version installed in host machine. 
This is the recommended way of using Jeka.

The wrapper consists in : 
* A very small jar (about 5k) located within your project in _[PROJECT ROOT]/jeka/wrapper/_.
* A property file _jeka.proparties_ located in _[PROJECT ROOT]/jeka/wrapper/_ mentionning the Jeka version yo use.
* Two scripts _jekaw.bat_ and _jekaw_ installed in _[PROJECT ROOT]_ to invoke in place of _jeka_.

When executed in place of _jeka_, _jekaw_ invoke the wrapper jar. This jar downloads the specified version of Jeka 
and pass the arguments to Jeka main class.

To start a project with a Jeka wrapper, just execute _jeka scaffold#wrap_ at the root of the project. It will add 
the mentioned files above to your project. Then just invoke _jekaw_ or _./jekaw_ in place of _jeka_.

#### Wrapper Mode in Multi-Project

If you are using multi-project structure, you don't have to scaffold wrapper on each. Just scaffold Jeka at a single 
place in your multi-project structure (for example in the root dir or in the 'master' project) and invoke it always 
from the sub project you want to build. 

For example execute `../jekaw clean java#pack` if the sub-project you want to build is 
located in a sub-directory of the root dir.


### Embedded Mode

Embedded mode is the most aggressive strategy to not depend on the host machine. It consists in embedding Jeka tool itself within 
the project.

When launched from command line, ___[JEKA_HOME]/dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar___ comes after ___[WORKING_DIR]/jeka/boot/*___ in _def classpath_.
This means that if a version of Jeka (dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar) is in this directory, the run will be processed with 
this instance of Jeka instead of the one located in in _[JEKA HOME]_.

This is called the __Embedded__ mode. The Jeka tool is embded within your project so the run does not depend 
of the presence and version of Jeka installed in the host machine. 

__Enable embedded mode : __

To enable embedded mode :
   1. Copy _[JEKA_HOME]/dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar_ into _[PROJECT_DIR]/jeka/boot/*_ directory.
   2. Copy _[JEKA_HOME]/jeka.bat_ and _[JEKA_HOME]/jeka_ at the root of [PROJECT_DIR] (optional).

Jeka is provided with a _scaffold_ plugin that do it for you : just execute `jeka scaffold#run -scaffold#embed`.

<strong>Run in embedded mode : </strong>

You can go two ways :
  - execute `jeka myFunction ...` as you would do in regular mode. This works only if you have copied jeka/jeka.bat shell scripts into _[PROJECT DIR]_
  - or execute `java -cp jeka/boot/* Main myFunction ...` from _[PROJECT_DIR]_ .


### Default Path Settings

#### Specify Jeka User Home

Jeka uses user directory to store user-specific configuration and cache files, in this document we refer to this directory using [Jeka User Home].
By default this directory is located at _[User Home]/.jeka_ (_[User Home]_ being the path given by `System.getProperty("user.home");`.
You can override this setting by defining the `JEKA_USER_HOME` environment variable.

#### Specify the Local Repository Cache

Jeka uses [Apache Ivy](http://ant.apache.org/ivy/) under the hood to handle module dependencies. Ivy downloads and stores locally artifacts consumed by projects.
By default the location is _[JEKA USER HOME]/cache/repo_ but you can redefine it by defining the `JEKA_REPO` environment variable.
You can get this location programmatically using `JkLocator.getJekaRepositoryCache()` method.

#### See Effective Paths

The Jeka displays the effective path at the very start of the process if launched with `-LogHeaders=true` option :

For example, `jeka help -LogHeaders` will output :

```

 _______     _
(_______)   | |
     _ _____| |  _ _____
 _  | | ___ | |_/ |____ |
| |_| | ____|  _ (/ ___ |
 \___/|_____)_| \_)_____|

                           The 100% Java build tool.

Working Directory : C:\Users\me\IdeaProjects\playground\jeka-sample
Java Home : C:\Program Files (x86)\Java\jdk1.8.0_121\jre
Java Version : 1.8.0_121, Oracle Corporation
Jeka Version : Xxxxx
Jeka Home : C:\Users\me\IdeaProjects\jeka\dev.jeka.core\jeka\output\distrib
Jeka User Home : C:\Users\me\.jeka
Jeka Repository Cache : C:\Users\me\.jeka\cache\repo

...
```
 
  
