## Inject Parameters

When using command line, Jeka accepts many ways of injecting parameters :

* Using environment variables
* Using system properties
* Using Jeka options

### Environment Variables

In Jeka code, environment variable can be captured in two ways :
* Using JDK `System#getenv` method
* Annotating a public instance field with `@JkEnv`. This way, the environment variable mentioned in annotation will be 
injected in the annotated field.
 
__Note__ : _JkOption_ mechanism takes precedence on environment variable injection. 

### System Properties

In Jeka code, System properties needs to be read using the JDK `System#getProperty` method.

System properties can be mentioned through (first overrides last):
* Command line as `Jeka doDefault -DmyProperty=myValue`.
* Properties mentioned in _[JEKA USER HOME]/system.properties_ file. 
* Properties mentioned in _[JEKA HOME]/system.properties_ file. 

__Note__ : In every case, defined system properties are injected after the creation of the java process (via `System#setProperty` method).

### Jeka Options

Jeka -options_ are similar to system properties as it stands for a set of key/value but they reside in a static map 
declared in `JkOptions` class.

_Options_ can be mentioned through (first overrides last):
* Command line as `Jeka doDefault -myOption=myValue`.
* Options mentioned in _[JEKA USER HOME]/options.properties_ file.
* Options mentioned in _[JEKA HOME]/options.properties_ file. 
  
__Note__ : for boolean options, when no value is specified, `true` will be used as default.

In Jeka code, options can be captured in two ways :
* Using static methods provided by `JkOptions` class.
* Declaring a public non-final instance field having same name than the option. The option value will be converted 
in the target type. Note that the option field may be private, but a public setter must be present.

For example, if a field is declared as :

```
class MyRun extends JkCommandSet {
   public int size = 10;
   ...
}
``` 
Then you can override the value by mentioning in command line `jeka doSomething -size=5`.

Handled types are :
* String
* All primitive types (and their wrappers)
* Enum
* File
* Composite options

If the value is not parsable to the target type, commands fails. 

To get a precise idea on how types are converted see [this code](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/org/jeka/tool/OptionInjector.java).

#### Composite options

Composite options are a way to structure your options in a tree-like structure. The example below group all server related 
option into a single one.

```Java
class MyRun extends JkClass {
    
    public Server deployServer = new Server();

    public static class Server {
      public String url;
      public String userName;
      public String password;
    }
  
}
```
Then the option name need to contain the full object path.
```
deployServer.url=http:/myServer:8090/to
deployServer.username=myUsername
deployServer.password=myPassword
```

#### Option Documentation

Option field can be annotated with  `@JkDoc` in order to provide a description when `jeka help` is executed.

```
@JkDoc("Make the test run in a forked process")
public boolean forkTests = false;
```

#### Built-in Options

Jeka defines some built-in options that are used by the engine itself. `jeka help` lists these standard options


### Implicit Parameters

In each Jeka project, you can add a property file at [PROJECT DIR]/jeka/cmd.properties to define command line arguments
to append automatically to the command line. 
For such, you must define a `_append` property in. This is especially useful when you want to rely on convention 
instead of writing a `JkClass` for your build.

This example shows how to activate _Java_ plugin by default.
```properties
_append = java# 
```
