## JkClass Parameters

Jeka classes are parameterizable. One can retrieve values defined at runtime by reading :

* environment variables
* system properties
* Jeka options

### Environment Variables

You can fetch environment variables using the standard `System#getenv` method or by annotating a public instance field 
with `@JkEnv`. _JkOption_ mechanism takes precedence on environment variable injection. 

### System Properties

As for environment variables, one can read system properties using the standard `System#getProperty` method.

Jeka proposes 3 ways of injecting system properties. They are considered in following order :

* Properties mentioned in Jeka command line as `Jeka doDefault -DmyProperty=myValue`.
* Properties mentioned in _[Jeka User Home]/system.properties_ file. 
* Properties mentioned in _[Jeka Home]/system.properties_ file. 
  Note that if you are running Jeka in embedded mode, the _[Jeka Home]/system.properties_ file will not be taken in account but _[project dir]/jeka/boot/system.properties_.

In every case, defined system properties are injected after the creation of the java process (via `System#setProperty` method).

### Jeka Options

Jeka options are similar to system properties as it stands for a set of key/value. 

Options are globally available in all Jeka classes but can be retrieve in a static typed way (injected in _Jeka class_ fields) 
or as set of key/string value.

#### Inject Options

Jeka proposes 3 ways to inject options. They are considered in following order :

* Options mentioned in Jeka command line as `Jeka doDefault -myOption=myValue`.
* Options mentioned in _[Jeka User Home]/options.properties_ file.
* Options mentioned in _[Jeka Home]/options.properties_ file. 
  Note that if you are running Jeka in embedded mode, the _[Jeka Home]/options.properties_ file will not be taken in account but _[project dir]/jeka/boot/options.properties_.

Note for boolean options, when no value is specified, `true` will be used as default.

#### Retrieve Options as String Values

You can retrieve string values using the `JkOptions` API providing convenient static methods as `JkOptions#get`, `JkOptions#getAll` or `JkOptions#getAllStartingWith(String prefix)`.

This way you only get the string literal value for the option and you have to parse it if the intended type was a boolean or a number.

#### Retrieve Options in CommandSet Class Fields

You can retrieve options just by declaring fields in _Jeka classes_. 
All public non-final instance fields of the invoked _Jeka class_, are likely to be injected as an option. Note that
it can be private, but a public setter must be present.

For example, if you declare a field like :

```
class MyRun extends JkCommandSet {
   public int size = 10;
   ...
}
``` 
Then you can override the value by mentioning in command line `jeka doSomething -size=5`.

Note that the injected string value will be automatically converted to the target type.

Handled types are : _String_, _all primitive types (and their wrappers)_, _enum_, _File_ and _composite object_.
If the value is not parsable to the target type, commands fails. 

To get a precise idea on how types are converted see [this code](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/org/jeka/tool/OptionInjector.java).

#### Composite options

Composite options are a way to structure your options. Say that you want to configure some server access with url, userName and passwsord. 
You can group all these information into a single object as :

```Java
public class Server {
    public String url;
    public String userName;
    public String password;
    // ...
}
```

Declare a new field of type `Server` in your Jeka class :

```Java
class MyRun extends JkCommandSet {
   public Server deployServer = new Server();
   ...
}
```
Then you can inject the server object using following options :

```
deployServer.url=http:/myServer:8090/to
deployServer.username=myUsername
deployServer.password=myPassword
```

#### Document Options

If you want your option been displayed when invoking `jeka help` you need to annotate it with `@JkDoc`.

For example :

```
@JkDoc("Make the test run in a forked process")
public boolean forkTests = false;
```

#### Built-in Options

Jeka defines some built-in options that are used by the engine itself. Unlike regular options, they respect an UpperCamelCase naming
convention :

- -LogVerbose (shorthand -LV) : if true, logs will display 'trace' level logs.
- -LogHeaders (shorthand -LH) : if true, meta-information about the run creation itself and method execution will be logged.
- -LogMaxLength (shorthand -LML) : Console will do a carriage return automatically after N characters are outputted in a single line (ex : -LML=120).
- -CommandClass (shorthand -CC) : Force to use the specified class as the _Jeka class_ to instantiate. It can be the short name of the class (without package prefix).

### cmd.properties File

In each jeka project, you can add a property file at [PROJECT DIR]/jeka/cmd.properties to define command line arguments
to append automatically to the command line. 
For such, you must define a `_append` property in. This is especially useful when you want to rely on convention 
instead of writing a `JkClass` for your build.

This example shows how to activate _Java_ plugin by default.
```properties
_append = java# 
```
