## Plugins

Jeka provides a pluggable architecture. In Jeka, a plugin is a class extending `JkPlugin` and named as *JkPlugin[PluginName]*.
The plugin name is inferred from Plugin class name.

Each plugin instantiated plugin is bound to a JkCommandSet object.

Plugins has 3 capabilities :
* Access to their owning JkCommandSet instance (so potentially modify it, load/modify other plugins).
* Expose _commands_ and _options_ to command line.
* Provide self documentation.

Jeka is bundled with a bunch of plugins (java, scaffold, eclipse, intellij, ...), but one can add extra plugins just 
by adding a jar or directory containing the plugin class to the _def classpath_. 

To see all available plugins in the _def classpath_, just execute `jeka help`.
See [Command Line Parsing](#CommandLineParsing) and [Run Class Pre-processing](#RunClassPre-processing(Import3rdpartylibraryintoRunClasspath))
to augment _def classpath_ .

### Binding Plugins

Plugins need not to be bound in _commandSet class_ code in order to be bound to the JkCommandSet instance. Just the fact to 
mention a plugin in the command line loads it.

For example `jeka scaffold#run java#` will load 'java' and 'scaffold' plugins into a JkCommandSet instance. 
'java' plugin instance will modify 'scaffold' plugin instance in such it produces a commandSet class declaring 'java' plugin 
when 'scaffold#run' is executed. It also creates Java project layout folders. See `activate` method in [JkPluginJava Code](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/dev/jeka/tool/builtins/java/JkPluginJava.java) 
to have a concrete view.

You can also force a plugin to be loaded in your _commandSet class_ code as below. That way, you don't need to mention `java#` in command line.

```Java
public class MyBuild extends JkCommandSet {
    
    MyBuild() {
        getPlugin(JkPluginJava.class);  // Loads 'java' plugins in MyBuild instances, a second call on 'plugins().get(JkPluginJava.class)' would return the same JkPluginJava instance.
        getPlugin("intellij");   // You can also load plugins by mentioning their name but it's slower cause it involves classpath scanning
    }
    
}
```

### Modify JkCommandSet Instance

JkCommandSet instances are created using `JkCommandSet#of` factory method. 
This method invokes `JkPlugin#beforeSetup` and `JkPlugin#afterSetup` methods on all plugins loaded in the JkCommandSet instance.
`JkPlugin#afterSetup` is supposed to be used to modify other plugins that might be bound to the owning commandSet.

For example, [Jacoco Plugin](https://github.com/jerkar/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/dev/jeka/core/tool/builtins/jacoco/JkPluginJacoco.java) 
does not provide _commands_ but configures 'java' plugin in such unit tests are forked on a JVM with Jacoco agent on. 
It also provides a utility class `JKocoJunitEnhancer` that supplies lower level features to launch Jacoco programmatically.

Some other plugins does not modify their owning commandSet instance. For instance, [Scaffold Plugin](https://github.com/jerkar/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/dev/jeka/core/tool/builtins/scaffold/JkPluginScaffold.java)
just exposes methods to scaffold new Jeka projects.


### Configure Plugins in JkCommandSet Class

There is three places where you can configure plugins :
* In `JkCommandSet` constructor : at this point options has not yet been injected, so it's the place to configure default option values.
* In `JkCommandSet#setup` : at this point, options has been injected.
  This is the place to configure plugins and other instance members.
* In `JkCommandSet#postSetup` : at this point, plugins has done their configuration job. So it is the place 
to override plugin settings, if needed.


Example of configuring a plugin in _commandSet class_.

```Java

    JkPluginSonar sonarPlugin = getPlugin(JkPluginSonar.class);  // Load sonar plugin 
    
    ...
    public MyBuild() {
		sonarPlugin.prop(JkSonar.BRANCH, "myBranch");  // define a default for sonar.branch property
        ...
    }
```
[Jeka own build class](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/jeka/def/org/jeka/CoreBuild.java) makes a good example.

### Document Plugins

Plugin authors can embed self-documentation using `@JkDoc` annotation on classes, command methods and option fields.

Writers can also mention that the plugin has dependencies on other plugins using `@JkDocPluginDeps` annotation. This annotation 
has only a documentation purpose and does not has impact on plugins loading mechanism.

A good example is [*Java Plugin*](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/org/jeka/tool/builtins/java/JkPluginJava.java)

### Plugin version compatibility 

As Jeka API is likely to evolve (less and less), plugins author can mention the Jeka lower version 
on which the plugin is compatible with using `JkPlugin#getLowestJekaCompatibleVersion` method.

It is also possible to mention the highest version on Jeka, a plugin version is compatible with.
As this information is unknown at the time of publishing the plugin, a mechanism based on a central registry 
keeps track this information.

It consists of publishing a specific format flat file on a url. 
The file contains the versions that start breaking compatibility.
Project repository might host this registry.

A working example is available for  [spring-boot plugin](https://github.com/jerkar/springboot-plugin).
The `breaking_versions.txt` is accessible at https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jerkar/springboot-plugin/master/breaking_versions.txt
declared in `JkPluginSpringboot` as :

```Java
@Override
protected String getBreakingVersionRegistryUrl() {
    return "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jerkar/springboot-plugin/master/breaking_versions.txt";
}
``` 
