## Import External Runs

There is many way to perform multi-project build. One of is to import runs from external projects.

### Principle

A _commandSet class_ instance can import _commandSet class_ instances from other projects. 

The current _def classpath_ is augmented with the _def classpath_ of imported projects.

Imported runs are not aware they are imported. In fact any run can be imported. The relation is uni-directional.

### Declare Run Import

To import a _commandSet class_ from an external project, use the `@JkDefImport` annotation as shown below :  

```Java
public class MyCommands extends JkCommandSet {
    
    @JkDefImport("../otherProject")   
    private BarCommands importedCommands;  

    public void doSomesthing() {
       importedCommands.doBar();   // use the command class defined in ../otherProject
       ...
```

_CommandSet classes_ are imported transitively, this means that, in above example, if `BarCommands` imports an other project, this 
last will be also imported. 

### Option Propagation

Options mentioned in command line are propagated to the imported commandSets. 

So for example you execute `jeka java#pack -java#tests.fork`, test will be forked for the main run and all imported ones.

### Method propagation

Methods mentioned in the command line are not automatically propagated to imported runs. Executing `jeka clean` will 
only clean the current run project.

To propagate method call to every imported commandSets, method name should be prefixed with a '*'. Executing `jeka clean*` will 
invoke 'clean' method on the current _commandSet class_ along along all imported commandSet classes.

### Access Imported Runs Programmatically

You can access to the list of imported commandSet classes within using `JkCommandSet#getImportedCommandSets` methods as show below :

```Java
public class MyRun extends JkCommandSet {

    ...

    public void doForAll() {
        this.clean();
        this.getImportedCommandSets().getAll().forEach(JkRun::clean);
        this.getImportedCommandSets().getAllOf(JkJavaProjectBuild.class).forEach(build -> build.java().pack());
    }
```

