# Library

Jeka contains a library for all regular things you need to build/publish projects and especially Java projects. 
It can be embedded in your own tool and used in a simple <code>main</code> method. 

The Jeka-core jar embeds third party jars as _Ivy_ or _BouncyCastle_. Those are not visible/accessible to client code 
due to a specific classloading mechanism, preventing version clashing with client dependencies.  

<span class="menuItem0">API Style</span>

_Jeka_ tries to stick with a consistent API design style.

**Class and Interface Naming Convention**

All Jeka public classes/interfaces start with `Jk`. The reason is for easing distinction, in IDE, between classes supposed be used 
in production or test and the ones used for building. It also helps to explore Jeka API.

**Mutable Vs Immutable**

As a rule of thumb _Jeka_ favors immutable objects for shallow structures and 
[parent-chaining trees](https://github.com/djeang/parent-chaining/blob/master/readme.md) for deeper ones. 
Both provide a fluent interface when possible.

**Instantiation**

All objects are instantiated using static factory methods. Every factory method names start with `of`.

**Read Accessors**

All accessor method names (methods returning a result without requiring IO, only computation) starts with `get`.

**Withers/Anders for Immutable Objects**

To create a subtly different object from another immutable one, _Jeka_ provides :
* Methods starting with `with` when a property is to be replaced by another.
* Methods starting with `and` when a collection property is to be replaced by the same one plus an extra element.
* Methods starting with `minus` when a collection property is to be replaced by the same one minus a specified element.

**Setters/Adders for Mutable Objects**
 
To modify a mutable object, _Jeka_ provides :
* Methods starting with `set` to replace a single property value by another.
* Methods starting with `add` to add a value to a collection property.
Those methods return the object itself for chaining.

**Translators**

To translate an object to another representation (for example a `JkDependencySet` to a  list of `JkScopedDependency`) 
_Jeka_ provides methods starting with `to`.


<span class="menuItem0">Domains Covered by the API</span>

The previous example demonstrates how the Java/project API can be used to build and publish Java projects. This API 
relies on other lower level ones provided by _Jeka_. In a glance these are the domains covered by the _Jeka_ APIs : 

* __Files :__ File trees, filters, zip, path sequence
* __System :__ Launching external process, Logging, Meta-info
* __Cryptography :__ PGP signer
* __Dependency management :__ Dependency management, publishing on repositories
* __Java :__ Compilation, javadoc, resource processor, manifest, packager, classloader, classpath, launching 
  * __Testing :__ Launching tests and get reports
  * __Project :__ Project structure to build
* __Tooling :__ Eclipse integration, intellij integration, Maven interaction, Git
* __Support :__ Set of utility class with static methods to handle low-level concerns 







