# Tool Part

<span class="menuItem0">Lexical</span>

The following concepts are used all over the tool section :

__[PROJECT DIR]__ : Refers to the root folder of the project to build (or to run commands on). This is where you would put pom.xml or build.xml files.

__[JEKA HOME]__ : Refers to the folder where Jeka is installed. You should find _jeka.bat_ and _jeka_ shell scripts at the root of this folder.

__[JEKA USER HOME]__ : Refers to the folder where Jeka stores caches, binary repository and global user configuration. By default it is located at [USER DIR]/.jeka.

__Def Classes :__ Java source files located under _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/def_. They are compiled on the flight by Jeka when invoked from the command line.

__Def Classpath :__ Classpath on which depends _def classes_ to get compiled and _commandSet classes_ to be executed. 
By default, it consists in _Jeka_ core classes. it can be augmented with any third party lib or def Classpath coming 
from another project. 
Once _def classes_ sources have been compiled, _def Classpath_ is augmented with their _.class_ counterpart.

__CommandSet Classes :__ Classes extending `JkCommandSet`. Their _commands_ can be invoked from the command line and 
their pubic fields set from the command line as well. Generally _def classes_ contains one _commandSet class_ though there can be many or 
none. CommandSet class can be a _def class_ but can also be imported from a library or external project.

__Commands :__ Java methods member of _commandSet classes_ and invokable from Jeka command line. 
They must be instance method (not static), public, zero-args and returning void. Every method verifying these constraints is considered as a _command_.
 
__Options :__ This is a set of key-value used to inject parameters. Options can be mentioned 
as command line arguments, stored in specific files or hard coded in _commandSet classes_.


<span class="menuItem0">In a Glance</span>

The Jeka tool consists in an engine able to run Java/Kotlin source code or compiled code from the command line.
 
Generally this code is intended to build Java projects but it can be used for any purpose.

In practice, your project has a structure respecting the following layout :

```
[Project Dir]
   |
   + jeka
      + boot             <-------- Put extra jars here to augment def Classpath.
      + def
         + MyCommands.java   <----- Class extending JkCommandSet
         + MyUtility.java    <---- Utility class consumed by MyCommands
         + OtherUtility.kt   <---- Kotlin code is also accepted
      + output              <---- Build artifacts are generated here
   + src
      + main
          + java
          + resources
   + ...
```

A _command class_ may look like :

```Java
import dev.jeka.core.tool.JkCommandSet;import dev.jeka.core.tool.JkDefClasspath;import org.apache.commons.httpclient.HttpClient;
import org.apache.commons.httpclient.methods.GetMethod;
import dev.jeka.core.tool.JkDoc;
import com.google.common.base.MoreObjects;

@JkDefClasspath("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")  // Imports 3rd party library to be used by def classes
@JkDefClasspath("com.google.guava:guava:21.0")
public class MyCommands extends JkCommandSet {    // The command class
    
    public String myParam1 = "myDefault";    // Overridable by injecting options in command line

    @JkDoc("Performs some tasks using http client")    // Only for self documentation purpose
    public void myMethod1() {                   // Run method (callable from command line)
        HttpClient client = new HttpClient();
        GetMethod getMethod = new GetMethod("http://my.url/" + myParam1);
        ....
    }
    
    public void myMethod2() {   // An other run method 
        MyUtility.soSomething();
        ...
    }

}
```

From __[Project Dir]__,  you can invoke any command method defined on `MyCommands` class from the command line.

For example, executing `jeka myMethod1 myMethod2 -myParam1=foo` does the following : 
1. compile sources located in _jeka/def_ directory,
2. instantiate a `MyCommands` instance,
3. inject _"foo"_ in the `myParam1` field,
4. invoke `myMethod1()`,
5. invoke `myMethod2()`.

If no _command class_ are present in _def classes_, Jeka picks `JkCommandSet`. In despite this class
does not provide any particular methods, you can still perform full Java builds by invoking built-in 'java' plugin. 
For such, execute `jeka clean java#pack` ([See Plugins](#Plugins)).

Executing `jeka` or `jeka help` on command line displays all run methods and options for the current _command class_.

The following chapters detail about how the mechanism works and what you can do with.



