## Jeka Runtime

This chapter describes how to use Jeka with command line and mostly what happens behind the cover when Jeka is run. 

Jeka is a pure Java application requiring JDK version 8 or higher (tested until 12). JDK is required and JRE is not sufficient as Jeka uses the JDK tools to compile _def classes_.

Jeka commands can be launched from both command line and your IDE.

### Jeka from Command line
 
To ease launching Java processes from command line, Jeka provides shell scripts ( [jeka.bat](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/META-INF/bin/jeka.bat) for Windows 
and [jeka](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/META-INF/bin/jeka) for Unix ). They are located at root 
of _[JEKA HOME]_. _[JEKA HOME]_ is supposed to be in your PATH environment variable. 

This script does the following :

1. Find the _Java_ executable path : Look first at `JEKA_JDK` environment variable then `JAVA_HOME`. If no such variables are  defined it takes the one lying in this JDK, otherwise it takes the one accessible in the _PATH_ of your OS. `JEKA_JDK/bin/java` or `JAVA_HOME/bin/java` must resolve to the _Java_ executable.
2. Get java execution option : If an environment variable `JEKA_OPTS` exists then its value is passed to the `java` command line parameters.
3. Get the classpath in the following order :
	* all jar and zip files found under _[WORKING DIR]/jeka/boot_
	* the _[JEKA_HOME]/dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar_ file 
4. Run the _java_ process for launching `Main` class passing the command line argument as is. This class main method does the following :                                                                     
     1. Parse the command line.
     2. Populate system properties from configuration files and command line.
     3. Pre-process _def classes_ . In this step, _def class_ code is parsed to detect 3rd party and external project imports. Imports are added to the _def classpath_.
     4. Compile _def classes_ using the classpath computed in previous step.
     5. Select the _command class_ to be run.
     6. Instantiate selected _command class_, inject options and bind plugins on it.
     7. Invoke methods specified in command line arguments : methods are executed in the order they appear on the command line.

The following sub-sections detail about these steps.

#### Parse the Command Line

Jeka parses the command line and processes each arguments according the following pattern :

* __Argument starts with `@` :__ This is a library import clause : the text just next to, is added to the _def Classpath_. 
  For example `jeka myMethod @dev.jeka:an-extra-plugin:3.3` augments the _def Classpath_ with the _an-extra-Plugin_ jar.
  This is similar to annotate a _def class_ with `@JkImport("dev.jeka:an-extra-plugin:3.3")`.
  This is intended to modifiate behavior of _command class_ by plugins dynamically.

* __Argument starts with `-` :__ This is an option declaration. The content following is is expected to be formatted as _optionName=optionValue_. 
  For example, `-repo.run.url=http://my.repo.milestone/' will inject 'http://my.repo.milestone/' in the 'repo.run.url' Jeka option.

* __In other cases :__ argument is considered as a run method name to be invoked on the _command class_ instance.

#### Populate System Properties from Configuration Files and Command line

Jeka loads system properties in order from :
* _[JEKA HOME]_/system.properties 
* _[JEKA USER HOME]_/system.properties
*  command line parsed above
    
The last loaded properties override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

Jeka follows a similar process to load options. It loads in order : 
* _[JEKA HOME]_/options.properties 
* _[JEKA USER HOME]_/options.properties
*  command line parsed above

The last loaded options override the previous ones if there is some conflicts.

#### Pre-process _Def Class_ Code (Import 3rd party library into _Def Classpath_)

In order to compile _def classes_, Jeka has to compute _def Classpath_ first. With Jeka you can specify run dependencies 
directly inside the source code using `@JkImport` or `@JkImportProject` annotations as shown below.

```Java 
@JkImport("commons-httpclient:commons-httpclient:3.1")
@JkImport("com.google.guava:guava:18.0")
@JkImport("../local/library/bin")
public class HttpClientTaskRun extends JkCommands {

    @JkImportProject("../another/project/using/jeka")
    private OtherRun otherRun;  // Command class from another project
    
    ...
```

To achieve this, Jeka parses source code of *all* classes under _jeka/def_ and add the detected imports to the _def Classpath_.
Note that classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.

When a dependency is expressed as a maven/ivy module, Jeka tries to resolve it using repository url defined by in order : 
* If option `repo.defName` is present and option `repo.${repo.defName}.url` is present as well, it takes the value of this property. 
* If no url is defined as such, it takes the value of `repo.def.url` option.
* If this option is not set, then it takes the value of `repo.download.url` option. 
* If the latest is not present as well, it falls back to Maven Central.

If a repository needs credentials, you need to supply it through Jeka options `repo.[repo name].username` and `repo.[repo name].password`.

Note that you can define several urls for a `repo.[repo name].url` by separating then with coma (as `repo.run.url=http://my.repo1, http://my.repo2.snapshot`).
 
As with other repo, if the download repository is an Ivy repo, you must prefix url with `ivy:` so for example you'll get `repo.run.url=ivy:file://my.ivy/repo`.

#### Compile Def Classes

Jeka compiles def class source files prior to execute it. Def class source files are expected to be in _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/def_. 
Classes having a name starting by a '_' are skipped.
If this directory does not exist or does not contains java sources, the compilation is skipped.
Compilation occurs upon the following classpath :
* Java libraries located in _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/boot_.
* dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar library
* Classpath defined in command classes as explained above.

It outputs class files in _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/output/def-classes_ directory.

Jeka uses the compiler provided by the running JDK. 

#### Select Command Class

Once compiled, Jeka augments the _def Classpath_ with classes compiled in previous step.
Then it selects one _command class_ from _def classpath_ and instantiate it.

The selection logic is :
* If `-CommandClass` option (shorthand `-CC`) is specified, then Jeka selects a class having the same name or same 
short name among _command classes_ present in _def classpath_.
* If this option is not set, Jeka looks for a _command class_ into _[PROJECT DIR]/jeka/output/def-classes_ . 
  It looks in alphabetic order first then sub-package (deep first).
  This means that class `SomeCommands` will be selected prior `apackage.SomeCommands`, and `aa.bb.SomeCommands` will be selected prior `ab.OtherCommands`.
* If no such class found, Jeka selects the built-in `JkCommands` class.

#### Instantiate Command Class

The commands instantiation process is defined in `ork.jeka.tool.JkCommands#of` factory method. It consists in :
1. Creating a new _command class_ instance (Invoking default constructor).
2. Injecting defined options in public instance fields.
3. Invoking `JkCommands#setup` method on _command class_. This method might be overridden by users to configure run and plugins before they have been activated.
4. Loading plugins defined in command line into the _command class_ instance.
5. Invoking `JkPlugin#activate` method on each loaded plugins. This method is defined by plugin authors.
6. Invoking `JkCommands#setupAfterPluginActivations` on _command class_. This method might be overridden by users to configure _command class_ instance once plugins have been activated.

#### Invoke Command Line Methods

Once _command class_ instantiated, Jeka invokes instance methods mentioned in command line as `jeka myFistMethod mySecondMethod ...`. 
Methods are invoked in order they appear in command line regardless if method is defined on the _command class_ itself or in a plugin.

In order a method to be considered as a _command_ (invokable from Jeka command line), it must :
* Be public
* Be instance method (no static method)
* Accept no arguments
* Return void

If Jeka command line specifies no method, then `help` method is invoked.

#### Error Handling

If an exception is thrown during the execution, Jeka displays full stack trace on the console except if 
this is a `JkException`. In this case, only the message is displayed.

### Jeka from IDE

#### IDE Classpath Setting

In order your IDE compiles and launches your _def classes_, you must ensure that project/module classpath contains :
* `dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar` (found in Jeka distrib)
* libs and folders mentioned in `@JkImport` annotations of your _def classes_.
* project/modules mentioned in `@JkImportProject` annotations of your _def command classes_.

Plugin methods `eclipse#generateFiles` and `intellij#generateIml` achieve this for you.

#### Launch from IDE

If launched from the IDE, _def classes_ are already compiled and the classpath already set by the IDE. 
This leads in a simpler and faster process.

To launch Jeka from your IDE, you can go two ways :
 
One is to create a main method in one of your _def classes_ as below and invoke it.

```Java
public static void main(String[] args) {
    JkInit.instanceOf(MyCommands.class, args).doSomething();
} 
```
The `JkInit#instanceOf` method loads options from args and instantiates _command classes_. Then user can 
configure it using hard coding prior launching any method programmatically.

The other way is to launch `Main` method from your IDE with same arguments as you would do with command line.

### Embedded Mode

When launched from command line, ___[JEKA_HOME]/dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar___ comes after ___[WORKING_DIR]/jeka/boot/*___ in _def classpath_.
This means that if a version of Jeka (dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar) is in this directory, the run will be processed with 
this instance of Jeka instead of the one located in in _[JEKA HOME]_.

This is called the __Embedded__ mode. The Jeka tool is embded within your project so the run does not depend 
of the presence and version of Jeka installed in the host machine.

__Enable embedded mode : __

To enable embedded mode :
   1. Copy _[JEKA_HOME]/dev.jeka.jeka-core.jar_ into _[PROJECT_DIR]/jeka/boot/*_ directory.
   2. Copy _[JEKA_HOME]/jeka.bat_ and _[JEKA_HOME]/jeka_ at the root of [PROJECT_DIR] (optional).

Jeka is provided with a _scaffold_ plugin that do it for you : just execute `jeka scaffold#run -scaffold#embed`.

<strong>Run in embedded mode : </strong>

You can go two ways :
  - execute `jeka myFunction ...` as you would do in regular mode. This works only if you have copied jeka/jeka.bat shell scripts into _[PROJECT DIR]_
  - or execute `java -cp jeka/boot/* Main myFunction ...` from _[PROJECT_DIR]_ .


### Default Path Settings

#### Specify Jeka User Home

Jeka uses user directory to store user-specific configuration and cache files, in this document we refer to this directory using [Jeka User Home].
By default this directory is located at _[User Home]/.jeka_ (_[User Home]_ being the path given by `System.getProperty("user.home");`.
You can override this setting by defining the `JEKA_USER_HOME` environment variable.

#### Specify the Local Repository Cache

Jeka uses [Apache Ivy](http://ant.apache.org/ivy/) under the hood to handle module dependencies. Ivy downloads and stores locally artifacts consumed by projects.
By default the location is _[JEKA USER HOME]/cache/repo_ but you can redefine it by defining the `JEKA_REPO` environment variable.
You can get this location programmatically using `JkLocator.getJekaRepositoryCache()` method.

#### See Effective Paths

The Jeka displays the effective path at the very start of the process if launched with `-LogHeaders=true` option :

For example, `jeka help -LogHeaders` will output :

```

 _______     _
(_______)   | |
     _ _____| |  _ _____
 _  | | ___ | |_/ |____ |
| |_| | ____|  _ (/ ___ |
 \___/|_____)_| \_)_____|

                           The 100% Java build tool.

Working Directory : C:\Users\me\IdeaProjects\playground\jeka-sample
Java Home : C:\Program Files (x86)\Java\jdk1.8.0_121\jre
Java Version : 1.8.0_121, Oracle Corporation
Jeka Version : Xxxxx
Jeka Home : C:\Users\me\IdeaProjects\jeka\dev.jeka.core\jeka\output\distrib
Jeka User Home : C:\Users\me\.jeka
Jeka Repository Cache : C:\Users\me\.jeka\cache\repo

...
```
 
  
