## Plugins

Jeka provides a pluggble architecture. In Jeka, a plugin is a class extending `JkPlugin` and named as *JkPlugin[PluginName]*.
The plugin name is inferred from Plugin class name.

Each plugin instance is owned by a JkCommands object, and can access to it through `JkPlugin#owner` protected field.

Plugins has 3 capabilities :
* Access to their owning JkCommands instance (so potentially modify it, load/modify other plugins).
* Expose _commands_ and _options_ to command line.
* Provide self documentation.

Jeka is bundled with a bunch of plugins (java, scaffold, eclipse, intellij, ...) but one can add extra plugins just 
by adding a jar or directory containing the plugin class to the _def classpath_. 

To see all available plugins in the _def classpath_, just execute `jeka help`.
See [Command Line Parsing](#CommandLineParsing) and [Run Class Pre-processing](#RunClassPre-processing(Import3rdpartylibraryintoRunClasspath))
to augment _def classpath_ .

### Load Plugins

Plugins need not to be mentioned in _command class_ code in order to be bound to the JkCommands instance. Just the fact to 
mention a plugin in the command line loads it.

For example `jeka scaffold#run java#` will load 'java' and 'scaffold' plugins into a JkCommands instance. 
'java' plugin instance will modify 'scaffold' plugin instance in such it produces a command class declaring 'java' plugin 
when 'scaffold#run' is executed. It also creates Java project layout folders. See `activate` method in [JkPluginJava Code](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/dev/jeka/tool/builtins/java/JkPluginJava.java) 
to have a concrete view.

You can also force a plugin to be loaded in your _command class_ code as below. That way, you don't need to mention `java#` in command line.

```Java
public class MyBuild extends JkCommands {
    
    MyBuild() {
        getPlugin(JkPluginJava.class);  // Loads 'java' plugins in MyBuild instances, a second call on 'plugins().get(JkPluginJava.class)' would return the same JkPluginJava instance.
        getPlugin("intellij");   // You can also load plugins by mentioning their name but it's slower cause it involves classpath scanning
    }
    
}
```

### Modify Owing JkCommands Instance

JkCommands instances are created using `JkCommands#of` factory method. This method invoke `JkPlugin#activate` method on all plugins loaded in the JkCommands instance.
By default, `activate` method does nothing but plugin implementations can override it in order to let the plugin modify its owning JkCommands or one of its plugins at instantiation time.

In fact, many plugins act just as modifier/enhancer of other plugins. 

For example, [Jacoco Plugin](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/org/jeka/tool/builtins/jacoco/JkPluginJacoco.java) 
does not provide _commands_ but configures 'java' plugin in such unit tests are forked on a JVM with Jacoco agent on. 
It also provides a utility class `JKocoJunitEnhancer` that supplies lower level features to launch Jacoco programmatically.

Some other plugins does not modify their owning JkCommands instance, for example [Scaffold Plugin](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/org/jeka/tool/builtins/scaffold/JkPluginScaffold.java) 
does not override `activate` method, therefore it has no side effect on its owning `JkCommands` instance. It only features extra _commands_ and _options_.


### Configure Plugins in JkCommands Class

There is three places where you can configure plugins :
* In `JkCommands` subclass constructors : at this point options has not yet been injected so it's the place to configure default option values.
* In `JkCommands#setup` subclass method : at this point, options has been injected but plugins has not been activated yet. 
  It is the place to configure plugins and other instance member to take options in account before activation.
* In `JkCommands#setupAfterPluginActivations` subclass method : at this point plugins has been activated. If you wan't to override 
some values plugin activation may have set, override this method.

Example of configuring a plugin in _command class_.

```Java

    JkPluginSonar sonarPlugin = getPlugin(JkPluginSonar.class);  // Load sonar plugin 
    
    ...
    public MyBuild() {
		sonarPlugin.prop(JkSonar.BRANCH, "myBranch");  // define a default for sonar.branch property
        ...
    }
```
[Jeka own build class](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/jeka/def/org/jeka/CoreBuild.java) makes a good example.

### Document Plugins

Plugin authors can embed self-documentation using `@JkDoc` annotation on classes, command methods and option fields.

Writers can also mention that the plugin has dependencies on other plugins using `@JkDocPluginDeps` annotation. This annotation 
has only a documentation purpose and does not has influence on plugin loading mechanism.

A good example is [*Java Plugin*](https://github.com/jeka/jeka/blob/master/dev.jeka.core/src/main/java/org/jeka/tool/builtins/java/JkPluginJava.java)

