## Import External Runs

There is many way to perform multi-project build. One of is to import runs from external projects.

### Principle

A _command class_ instance can import _command class_ instances from other projects. 

The current _def classpath_ is augmented with the _def classpath_ of imported projects.

Imported runs are not aware they are imported. In fact any run can be imported. The relation is uni-directional.

### Declare Run Import

To import a _command class_ from an external project, use the `@JkImportProject` annotation as shown below :  

```Java
public class MyCommands extends JkCommands {
    
    @JkImportProject("../otherProject")   
    private BarCommands importedCommands;  

    public void doSomesthing() {
       importedCommands.doBar();   // use the command class defined in ../otherProject
       ...
```

_Command classes_ are imported transitively, this means that, in above example, if `BarCommands` imports an other project, this 
last will be also imported. 

### Option Propagation

Options mentioned in command line are propagated to the imported commands. 

So for example you execute `jeka java#pack -java#tests.fork`, test will be forked for the main run and all imported ones.

### Method propagation

Methods mentioned in the command line are not automatically propagated to imported runs. Executing `jeka clean` will 
only clean the current run project.

To propagate method call to every imported commands, method name should be prefixed with a '*'. Executing `jeka clean*` will 
invoke 'clean' method on the current _command class_ along along all imported command classes.

### Access Imported Runs Programmatically

You can access to the list of imported command classes within using `JkCommands#getImportedCommands` methods as show below :

```Java
public class MyRun extends JkRun{

    ...

    public void doForAll() {
        this.clean();
        this.getImportedCommands().all().forEach(JkRun::clean);
        this.getImportedCommands().allOf(JkJavaProjectBuild.class).forEach(build -> build.java().pack());
    }
```

